---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 01-introSLR.md in _episodes_rmd/
source: Rmd
title: "An introduction to linear regression"
objectives:
  - "Identify questions that can be addressed with a simple linear regression model."
  - "Describe the components that are involved in simple linear regression."
keypoints:
  - Simple linear regression requires one continuous dependent variable and one continuous or categorical explanatory variable. In addition, the assumptions of the model must hold.
  - The components of the model describe the values of the dependent and explanatory variables, the mean of the dependent variable at the 0-point of the explanatory variable, the effect of the explanatory variable on the dependent variable and the difference between the expectation of the dependent variable and the observed value. 
questions:
  - What type of variables are required for simple linear regression?
  - What do each of the componenets in the equation of a simple linear regression model represent?
teaching: 10
execises: 10
---



Simple linear regression is commonly used, but when is it appropriate to apply this method? Broadly speaking, simple linear regression may be suitable when the following conditions hold:

* You seek a *model* of the relationship between one *continuous* dependent variable and one *continuous* or *categorical* explanatory variable. 
* Your data and simple linear regression model do not violate the assumptions of the simple linear regression model. We will cover these assumptions in the final episode of this lesson.

> ## Exercise  
> A colleague has started working with the NHANES data set. They approach 
> you for advice on the use of simple linear regression on this data. 
> Assuming that the assumptions of the simple linear regression model hold, which
> of the following questions could potentially be tackled with a simple 
> linear regression model? Think closely about the outcome and explanatory
> variables, between which a relationship will be modelled to answer the 
> research questions.
>   
> A) Does home ownership (whether a participant's home is owned or rented)
> vary across income bracket in the general US population?  
> B) Is there an association between BMI and pulse in the general US population?  
> C) Do teenagers on average have a higher pulse than adults in the 
> general US population?
> 
> > ## Solution
> > A) The outcome variable is home ownership and the explanatory variable is 
> > income bracket.
> > Since home ownership is a categorical outcome variable, this question is not 
> > suited for simple linear regression.  
> > B) Since both variables are continous, this question may be suited 
> > for simple linear regression.  
> > C) The outcome variable is pulse and the explanatory variable is age group
> > (teenager vs adult). Since the outcome variable is 
> > continuous and the explanatory variable is categorical, 
> > this question may be suited to simple linear regression.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

The simple linear regression model can be described by the following equation:

$$
E(y) = \beta_0 + \beta_1 \times x_1
$$.

The outcome variable is denoted by $y$ and the explanatory variable is denoted by $x_1$. Simple linear regression models the *expectation* of $y$, i.e. $E(y)$. This is another way of referring to the *mean* of $y$. The expectation of $y$ is a function of $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1 \times x_1$. The intercept is denoted by $\beta_0$ - this is the value of $E(y)$ when the explanatory variable, $x_1$, equals 0. The effect of our explanatory variable is denoted by $\beta_1$ - for every one-unit increase in $x_1$, $E(y)$ changes by $\beta_1$.


Before fitting the model, we have access to $y$ and $x_1$ values for each observation in our data. For example, we may want to model the relationship between weight and height. $y$ would represent weight and $x_1$ would represent height. After we fit the model, R will return to us values of $\beta_0$ and $beta_1$ - these are *estimated* using our data. 

> ## Exercise  
> We are asked to study the effect of participant's age on their BMI. We are given the following equation of a simple linear regression to use:  
> $$E(y) = \beta_0 + \beta_1 \times x_1$$.    
> Match the following components of this simple linear regression model to their
> descriptions:  
> 1. $E(y)$  
> 2. ${\beta}_0$  
> 3. $x_1$
> 4. ${\beta}_1$  
>  
> A) Mean BMI at a particular value of age.   
> B) The expected BMI when the age equals 0.    
> C) The expected change in BMI with a one-unit increase in age.  
> D) A specific value of age.
>  
> > ## Solution
> > A) 1   
> > B) 2  
> > C) 4  
> > D) 3  
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

An alternative way of writing the same simple linear regression model is:

$$
y_i = \beta_0 + \beta_1 \times {x_1}_i + \epsilon_i
$$.

The following elements have changed:
* Instead of $E(y)$, we have $y_i$. This is the observed value of the response for participant $i$.
* Instead of $x_1$, we have ${x_1}_i$. This is the observed value of the explanatory variable for participant $i$. 
* In addition, we have $\epsilon_i$. This is also known as the *residual* for participant $i$. The residual equals the difference between the outcome expected for participant $i$ by the model and the true observed value, i.e. $\epsilon_i = E(y_i) - y_i$. We will return to residuals in the final episode of this lesson, where they will play a role in assessing the assumptions of the simple linear regression model. 

> ## Exercise  
> Staying with our model of the effect of participant's age on their BMI, 
> we are now given the alternative equation of a simple linear regression to use: 
> $$y_i = \beta_0 + \beta_1 \times {x_1}_i + \epsilon_i$$.    
> Match the following components of this simple linear regression model to their
> descriptions:  
> 1. $y_i$  
> 2. ${\beta}_0$  
> 3. ${x_1}_i$
> 4. ${\beta}_1$
> 5. $\epsilon_i$
>  
>    
> A) The mean change in BMI following a one-unit increase in age.   
> B) The mean BMI when age equals 0.      
> C) A participant's BMI.  
> D) The difference between the expected and observed BMI values.  
> E) A participant's age.  
>  
> > ## Solution
> > A) 4   
> > B) 2  
> > C) 1  
> > D) 5  
> > E) 3
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

